.TH VTS 1
.SH NAME
vts \- Plan 9 console daemon: VT100 rendering, session persistence, line editing in one 9P server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vts
[
.B -n
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Vts
is a 9P file server that collapses what Unix splits across three tools
(st for VT100 rendering, tmux for session persistence, zsh for line
editing) into a single Plan 9 service. It posts at
.B /srv/vts
with the namespace
.IP
.EX
/                directory
/ctl             daemon control
/<sess>/         per session
/<sess>/ctl      per-session control
/<sess>/cons     bidirectional shell I/O
/<sess>/cells    binary cell-diff stream
.EE
.PP
By default, vts starts one session named
.B 1
and spawns
.B rc(1)
inside it. rc's stdout is fed through a VT100 state machine into a
cell buffer.  Writes to
.B /<sess>/cons
deliver keystrokes to rc's stdin. Reads from
.B /<sess>/cells
return a binary diff frame (header + changed cells); see
.IR vts-9p (5).
.PP
With
.B -n
no rc is spawned. Useful for testing the 9P interface in isolation.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -n
Do not spawn rc. The server still serves /srv/vts; writes to cons are
fed directly through the parser.
.SH CONTROL COMMANDS
Writes to
.B /srv/vts/ctl
accept newline-terminated commands:
.IP
.EX
new <name>     create a new session and spawn rc in it
kill <name>    destroy the session (sends 'kill' note to rc)
.EE
.SH EXAMPLES
Start vts and attach a remote SSH user:
.IP
.EX
% vts &
% ssh -p 2222 glenda@localhost
glenda% vts-attach 1
.EE
.PP
List sessions:
.IP
.EX
% cat /srv/vts > /n/vts ; cat /n/vts/ctl
.EE
.PP
Create a second session:
.IP
.EX
% echo 'new dev' > /n/vts/ctl
% ls /n/vts
ctl  1  dev
.EE
.SH FILES
.TP
.B /srv/vts
9P service mount point
.TP
.B /sys/src/cmd/vts/
source
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR vts-attach (1),
.IR rio (1),
.IR rc (1),
.IR thread (2),
.IR 9p (2)
.SH HISTORY
First written 2026.
.SH BUGS
.PP
Programs that gate features on
.IR isatty (3)
(htop, lazygit) still see a dumb pipe.  vts does not implement PTYs.
.PP
A killed session leaks its
.I Session
struct; freeing requires waiting for the reader proc to exit, which is
not implemented in this version.
.PP
Session-scoped scrollback and named-session persistence across vts
restarts are not implemented.
