.TH VTS-ATTACH 1
.SH NAME
vts-attach \- attach a dumb TTY to a vts session
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vts-attach
[
.B -r
]
[
.I session
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Vts-attach
connects a dumb-pipe TTY (such as an SSH session, drawterm dumb console,
or local rc) to a session served by
.IR vts (1).
It re-serializes the cell buffer into VT100 escape sequences on stdout
and forwards stdin to the session's cons file.
.PP
With no argument, attaches to session
.BR 1 .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -r
Read-only mode: do not forward stdin to cons. Useful for tail -f-style
viewing.
.SH IMPLEMENTATION
.PP
Mounts
.B /srv/vts
onto
.B /n/vts
if not already mounted.  Polls
.B /n/vts/<session>/cells
every 50ms; each read returns one diff frame which is decoded into
VT100 cursor-positioning + SGR + UTF-8 rune emissions.
.PP
The writer half (unless
.B -r
is given) opens
.B /dev/consctl
and sets rawon so keystrokes deliver byte-by-byte. A separate proc
loops reading stdin and writing to cons.
.SH EXAMPLES
.IP
.EX
% vts-attach              # attach to session 1
% vts-attach work         # attach to session named "work"
% vts-attach -r 1         # read-only view of session 1
.EE
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR vts (1),
.IR consctl (3)
.SH BUGS
.PP
Polling-based; no notification on cells update means there's always
50ms latency before remote screen catches up.
.PP
On disconnect, the session is left running (which is the desired
tmux-like behavior), but if the user just closed SSH without
exiting vts-attach cleanly, the writer proc may keep running until rc
exits.
